Lab 3.2: Firewall Rules with iptables
CompTIA SEC+ Hands-On Lab, Domain 3: Implementation
Prepared by: Jared Lomeli
Date: June 21, 2026

1. Objective
The purpose of this lab was to practice configuring host-based firewall rules using iptables, the packet filtering tool built into Linux, and to observe firsthand how those rules change what traffic is allowed to reach a system. SEC+ covers firewalls heavily under both Architecture and Design and Implementation, and iptables provides a hands-on way to see concepts like default deny, rule ordering, and protocol or port-based filtering actually take effect on live network traffic rather than just reading about them in the abstract.

2. Lab Environment
This lab used the Kali Linux VM as the system being hardened (the firewall was configured on Kali itself) and the Metasploitable 2 VM as an external host used to test whether the firewall rules actually blocked traffic. Both VMs were connected to the same VirtualBox Host-Only network (192.168.56.0/24) established in the earlier lab setup, with the Windows host machine also able to reach that same network for an additional connectivity test.
Kali Linux: the system under configuration; all iptables commands were run here, in its own terminal, using sudo.
Metasploitable 2: used only as a traffic source to test whether pings from another host on the network were blocked or allowed.
Windows host: used for a second, independent verification that the ICMP block applied to traffic from outside the Host-Only VM network as well.

3. Step-by-Step Procedure
I opened a terminal on Kali and first listed the existing iptables rules to establish a baseline, confirming that the INPUT, FORWARD, and OUTPUT chains were essentially empty and defaulting to ACCEPT, meaning nothing was being blocked yet.
I then added a rule to the INPUT chain that dropped incoming ICMP echo-request packets, which is the packet type generated by the ping command. This was meant to simulate hardening Kali against being pinged and discovered on the network.
I switched to the Metasploitable 2 VM and attempted to ping Kali's IP address on the Host-Only network. The pings did not get through, confirming the DROP rule was working as expected on traffic originating from another VM.
As a second check, I opened Command Prompt on the Windows host and pinged Kali's IP address directly. These pings were also blocked, confirming the rule applied to ICMP traffic regardless of which machine on the network initiated it.
I removed the ICMP DROP rule so Kali would respond to pings again, restoring the baseline before testing a different scenario.
I then built a more restrictive pair of rules: one that explicitly accepted incoming TCP traffic on port 22 (SSH), followed by a second rule that dropped all other incoming TCP traffic. Because iptables evaluates rules in order and stops at the first match, this effectively created an allow-list where only SSH was permitted and everything else on TCP was denied by default.
Finally, I flushed all the rules I had added with iptables -F to return Kali to its original, unrestricted state and avoid leaving the lab VM in a locked-down condition for future exercises.

4. Commands & Actions Performed
sudo iptables -L -n -v
Lists all current iptables rules across the INPUT, OUTPUT, and FORWARD chains, with -n keeping IP addresses and ports numeric and -v showing packet and byte counters. This was used to confirm the firewall was wide open (default ACCEPT) before any rules were added.

sudo iptables -A INPUT -p icmp --icmp-type echo-request -j DROP
Appends (-A) a rule to the INPUT chain that matches the ICMP protocol, specifically echo-request packets (what a ping sends), and drops them silently (-j DROP) instead of replying. This blocks incoming pings without sending any response back to the sender.

ping 192.168.56.X (Kali's IP, run from Metasploitable)
Sends ICMP echo-request packets from Metasploitable to Kali to test whether the new DROP rule actually stops ping traffic in practice, not just in theory.

ping 192.168.56.X (Kali's IP, run from Windows Command Prompt)
Repeats the same connectivity test from the Windows host machine, confirming the block was not specific to VM-to-VM traffic but applied to any source attempting to ping Kali on that network.

sudo iptables -D INPUT -p icmp --icmp-type echo-request -j DROP
Deletes (-D) the specific ICMP DROP rule added earlier, restoring Kali's ability to respond to pings and returning the INPUT chain to its prior state.

sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -j ACCEPT
sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp -j DROP
The first rule explicitly allows incoming TCP traffic destined for port 22 (SSH). The second rule, added immediately after, drops all other incoming TCP traffic. Because iptables checks rules top to bottom and stops at the first match, SSH traffic matches and is accepted before it ever reaches the DROP rule, while every other TCP port falls through to the DROP rule and is denied. This is a simple allow-list firewall policy.

sudo iptables -F
Flushes (-F) all rules from the currently selected chain, clearing out everything added during the lab and returning the firewall to its original open state for future exercises.

5. Network / Flow Diagram
Host-Only network: 192.168.56.0/24

Windows Host          Metasploitable 2 (ping test)
    \                       /
     \                     /
      v                   v
      [ ICMP echo-request packets ]
                |
                v
  +-----------------------------------+
  | Kali Linux 192.168.56.10X        |
  | iptables INPUT chain:             |
  | -p icmp echo-request -> DROP      |
  +-----------------------------------+
                |
                v
  (no reply sent -- ping fails from both sources)

Second scenario: SSH allow-list
  incoming TCP traffic, any port
                |
                v
  +-----------------------------------+
  | Kali INPUT chain (in order):      |
  | 1) tcp --dport 22 -> ACCEPT       |
  | 2) tcp (any port) -> DROP         |
  +-----------------------------------+
         |              |
         v              v
  port 22 (SSH)    all other ports
  matches rule 1   fall through to rule 2
  -> ALLOWED       -> DROPPED

6. Results & Observations
Before any rules were added, the INPUT chain was effectively a default-allow policy -- every packet was accepted because no rules existed to deny anything.
Once the ICMP DROP rule was in place, pings from both Metasploitable and the Windows host stopped receiving replies entirely, confirming the rule blocked the traffic at the host level regardless of where it originated.
Building the SSH allow-list rules demonstrated that iptables evaluates rules in the exact order they are listed and stops at the first match -- this is why the ACCEPT rule for port 22 had to come before the blanket TCP DROP rule. If the order had been reversed, the DROP rule would have matched every TCP packet first, including SSH, and the allow rule would never have been reached.
Overall, the lab made clear that a default-deny posture (block everything, then explicitly allow only what is needed) is far more secure than a default-allow posture (allow everything, then try to block specific bad traffic), since default-deny does not depend on anticipating every possible threat in advance.

7. What I Learned
This lab tied directly into several SEC+ Implementation concepts. iptables is a stateless-capable packet filter, but it can also track connection state, which connects to the SEC+ distinction between stateless firewalls (filtering packet by packet with no memory of past traffic) and stateful firewalls (tracking active connections and making decisions based on that context).
The SSH allow-list exercise was a direct, hands-on demonstration of the implicit deny principle: when a final DROP rule catches everything that was not explicitly allowed above it, anything not matching an ACCEPT rule is denied by default. This is the same logic behind Access Control Lists (ACLs) on routers and firewalls, where rules are processed in order and the first matching rule wins.
Watching the ICMP block take effect against two different sources (a VM on the lab network and the Windows host outside it) reinforced that firewall rules operate on the traffic itself, not on trust in the sender, which is a core idea behind Network Access Control. Practicing the commands directly, rather than only reading about firewall theory, made the relationship between rule order, protocol and port matching, and default deny far easier to remember for the exam.
