Lab 6.1: Detecting a Brute Force Attack with Wazuh
CompTIA SEC+ Hands-On Lab, Part 8: Wazuh SIEM Lab (Bonus), tied to Domain 4: Operations & Incident Response
Prepared by: Jared Lomeli
Date: June 27, 2026
1. Objective
This lab demonstrated how a SIEM detects a brute force attack by analyzing authentication logs in real time. It revisited the exact Hydra attack run against Metasploitable's FTP service back in Lab 1.3, but this time viewed the event from the defender's seat using the Wazuh dashboard instead of from the attacker's terminal, directly reinforcing SEC+ Domain 4 topics around SIEM, log monitoring, and threat detection.
2. Lab Environment
This lab used all three lab VMs together for the first time: Kali Linux acted as both the attacker and, with the Wazuh agent installed on it, the monitored endpoint; Metasploitable 2 was the brute-force target; and a new Wazuh Manager VM (Ubuntu Server, running the Wazuh Manager, Indexer, and Dashboard components) acted as the central SIEM collecting and correlating events. All three VMs were connected over the same Host-Only network, and the Wazuh Dashboard itself was viewed from a browser on the Windows host.
Kali Linux: ran the Hydra brute-force attack and also hosted the Wazuh agent shipping its logs to the Manager.
Metasploitable 2: the target of the brute-force attempt against its FTP service.
Wazuh Manager (Ubuntu Server VM): received, indexed, and correlated the authentication failure events, and served the Dashboard used to review alerts.
3. Step-by-Step Procedure
I opened the Wazuh Dashboard and navigated to Security Events to note the baseline alert count before generating any new activity.
From Kali, I re-ran the Hydra brute-force attack against Metasploitable's FTP service that I had originally used back in Lab 1.3, this time with the Wazuh agent running and reporting to the Manager.
I returned to the Wazuh Dashboard within about a minute and watched the Security Events graph for a spike corresponding to the attack.
I opened Threat Hunting and filtered the alert list, first by the Kali agent's name and then by the authentication-failed rule group, to isolate the events generated by the attack.
I reviewed the resulting alerts against Wazuh's 0 to 15 severity scale to see where the authentication failures landed on that scale.
I clicked into several individual alerts to inspect their full detail, including timestamp, the raw log line that triggered the rule, the rule ID and description, and the source IP of the attack.
4. Commands & Actions Performed
hydra -l msfadmin -P test_passwords.txt 192.168.56.102 ftp
Repeats the Lab 1.3 brute-force login attempt against Metasploitable's FTP service using a known username and a password list, this time with the Wazuh agent active so the resulting authentication failures are captured and alerted on.
agent.name: kali
Entered in the Wazuh Threat Hunting search bar to filter the alert list down to only events reported by the Kali agent.
rule.groups: authentication_failed
Used as a second filter in Threat Hunting to isolate alerts tied specifically to failed authentication attempts, separating them from unrelated log noise.
5. Network / Flow Diagram
 [Kali Linux + Wazuh Agent] -- hydra -l msfadmin -P test_passwords.txt ftp --> [Metasploitable 2]
  192.168.56.x                      (brute-force attempt)                     192.168.56.102, FTP (21)
        |
        | Wazuh agent continuously ships auth/system logs
        v
 [Wazuh Manager / Indexer]  (Ubuntu Server VM, Host-Only network)
        |
        | correlates repeated failed-login events,
        | raises 'Multiple authentication failures' alert (severity 7-11)
        v
 [Wazuh Dashboard]  (viewed from a browser on the Windows host)
        Security Events graph spikes -> Threat Hunting shows individual + correlated alerts
6. Results & Observations
Within roughly a minute of launching the Hydra attack, the Security Events graph on the Wazuh Dashboard showed a clear spike above the baseline count recorded before the attack.
Filtering Threat Hunting by the Kali agent and by the authentication_failed rule group surfaced a cluster of individual failed-login alerts landing in the medium severity range (7 to 11), exactly where the guide indicated authentication failures should land.
Beyond the individual failure alerts, Wazuh also raised a higher-level 'Multiple authentication failures' alert, demonstrating correlation, the SIEM recognizing a pattern across many small events rather than just logging each one in isolation.
Clicking into individual alerts showed the full raw log line, rule ID, rule description, and source IP, giving the same underlying attack a completely different, defender-side view compared to watching Hydra's own terminal output in Lab 1.3.
7. What I Learned
Seeing the same Hydra attack from both the attacker's terminal in Lab 1.3 and the Wazuh Dashboard here made the value of a SIEM concrete: without log correlation, dozens of individual failed-login events are easy to miss, but Wazuh's correlation rule turned them into one clear, high-priority alert.
This lab also reinforced core SEC+ Domain 4 vocabulary in a hands-on way, including SIEM, IOC (the repeated failed logins themselves were the indicator of compromise), and the basic SOC analyst workflow of detect, investigate, and respond.
Finally, walking through Wazuh's 0 to 15 severity scale and seeing where authentication failures actually landed on it gave me a much more concrete sense of how a real SIEM prioritizes alerts than just memorizing the severity ranges from a study guide.
