Lab 2.1: Understanding Network Segmentation
CompTIA SEC+ Hands-On Lab, Domain 2: Architecture & Design
Prepared by: Jared Lomeli
Date: June 19, 2026
1. Objective
The purpose of this lab was to understand network segmentation by directly observing how an isolated Host-Only network behaves compared to a network with internet access. SEC+ Domain 2 covers segmentation, DMZ design, and isolation as core architectural security controls, and this exercise turns those abstract concepts into something I could see happen on my own machines.
2. Lab Environment
The lab began with both Kali Linux and Metasploitable 2 attached only to the Host-Only network (192.168.56.0/24), which has no route to the internet. Partway through the exercise, a second network adapter was added to Kali only, configured for NAT, giving Kali, but not Metasploitable, a path to the internet.
Kali Linux: started with one adapter on the Host-Only network, then gained a second NAT adapter for internet access.
Metasploitable 2: kept on the Host-Only network only, at 192.168.56.101, with no internet-facing adapter at any point.
3. Step-by-Step Procedure
I opened a terminal in Kali and checked my own network configuration to confirm which IP address and adapter Kali was using on the Host-Only network.
I attempted to ping a public internet address from Kali to test whether the Host-Only network had any route out. The ping failed, confirming Kali was fully isolated at that point.
I shut down the Kali virtual machine, opened its settings, and enabled a second network adapter, configuring it as a NAT adapter so it could reach the internet.
I started Kali back up and repeated the ping test to the same public address. This time the ping succeeded, confirming the new NAT adapter gave Kali internet access.
I then pinged Metasploitable's IP address again from Kali to confirm that the original Host-Only connection between the two VMs still worked even after adding the second adapter.
4. Commands & Actions Performed
ip addr show
This lists all network interfaces on the Kali VM along with their assigned IP addresses, which I used to confirm Kali's address on the Host-Only network.
ping 8.8.8.8
This sends ICMP echo requests to a well-known public IP address (a public DNS server) to test whether the current network configuration can reach the internet.
ping 192.168.56.101
This tests connectivity from Kali to Metasploitable's IP address on the Host-Only network, confirming the lab network itself stayed intact regardless of Kali's internet access.
5. Network / Flow Diagram
        Host-Only Network (192.168.56.0/24, isolated)   +----------------------+         +--------------------------+   |   Kali Linux eth0     |<------->|   Metasploitable 2 eth0   |   |   192.168.56.x        |  ping   |   192.168.56.101          |   +----------------------+         +--------------------------+             ^             | eth1 (NAT, added later)             v   +----------------------+   |  Internet (8.8.8.8)   |   <-- reachable from Kali eth1 only   +----------------------+   <-- NOT reachable from Metasploitable
6. Results & Observations
With only the Host-Only adapter active, Kali could not reach 8.8.8.8 at all, the ping requests returned no response, confirming the network had no path to the internet.
After adding the NAT adapter, the same ping to 8.8.8.8 succeeded immediately, showing Kali now had two separate network paths, one isolated and one internet-facing.
Metasploitable remained completely isolated throughout, it never gained internet access because it was never given a second adapter, which is exactly the intended behavior for a deliberately vulnerable target machine.
7. What I Learned
This lab made network segmentation feel concrete rather than theoretical. Watching Kali go from fully isolated to dual-homed, while Metasploitable stayed locked inside the Host-Only network the entire time, illustrated exactly why architects separate sensitive or vulnerable systems from internet-facing ones. It mirrors the logic behind a DMZ: untrusted or high-risk systems sit in their own segment, while only specific, controlled hosts are given a path to less trusted networks.
The exercise reinforced that segmentation is enforced at the network interface and routing level, not just through firewall rules, and that keeping a vulnerable system off the internet entirely is one of the simplest and most effective isolation controls available.
