Lab 4.1: Log Analysis
CompTIA SEC+ Hands-On Lab, Domain 4: Operations & Incident Response
Prepared by: Jared Lomeli
Date: June 21, 2026

1. Objective
This lab focused on logs as the primary evidence source for detecting and investigating security incidents. The goal was to read authentication logs directly, deliberately generate suspicious activity (failed logins and a brute-force attack), and then observe how that activity appears in the log data. Security+ candidates are expected to understand log analysis as the foundation that SIEM platforms like Wazuh build on, so reading raw logs by hand first builds intuition for what an automated detection rule is actually looking for.

2. Lab Environment
This lab spanned the Kali Linux VM, used as the attacking/observing host, and the Metasploitable 2 VM, used as the target whose authentication log was inspected, both on the shared 192.168.56.0/24 host-only network. The Wazuh VM was not directly queried in this lab, but the exercise is a direct precursor to Wazuh-based log analysis, since it reproduces by hand the kind of authentication events a SIEM agent would normally forward automatically.
Kali Linux: the attacking and observing workstation; commands were run from its terminal.
Metasploitable 2: the target at 192.168.56.101; its authentication log was inspected for evidence of the attacks generated from Kali.

3. Step-by-Step Procedure
I started on the Kali VM by reading the first portion of its own authentication log to get a feel for the normal format of an auth log entry: timestamp, hostname, service name, and message.
I then filtered that same log for the string "Failed password" to isolate failed login attempts, but found few or no entries yet since the system had not seen any failed logins.
To generate real data, I attempted to SSH from Kali into Metasploitable using a deliberately wrong username and password combination, repeating the wrong password a few times before cancelling with Ctrl+C.
I then switched to the Metasploitable VM and checked its own authentication log, filtering for "Failed" entries, and confirmed the failed attempts I had just generated were recorded there with timestamps, usernames, and source IP information.
Finally, to see what large-scale malicious activity looks like in log form, I re-ran the Hydra password attack from Lab 1.3 against Metasploitable and again checked the auth log, this time observing a dramatically larger number of failed-login entries appear in a very short window of time.

4. Commands & Actions Performed
sudo cat /var/log/auth.log | head -50
Printed the first 50 lines of the authentication log on Kali so I could see the normal structure of an auth log entry before looking for anomalies. Each line contains a timestamp, hostname, service name, and event message.

sudo grep "Failed password" /var/log/auth.log
Filtered the log down to only failed-password events, which is the specific string OpenSSH writes whenever a login attempt fails due to an incorrect credential.

ssh wronguser@192.168.56.101
Initiated an SSH connection from Kali to Metasploitable using an intentionally invalid username, then supplied a wrong password a few times to generate failed-login events on the target before cancelling with Ctrl+C.

sudo cat /var/log/auth.log | grep "Failed"
Run on Metasploitable, this filtered its authentication log for failure events, confirming the failed attempts from Kali had landed in the target's own log, each with a timestamp, the attempted username, and the source IP address (Kali's address on the lab network).

hydra -l msfadmin -P /usr/share/wordlists/rockyou.txt.gz 192.168.56.101 ssh
Re-ran the brute-force password attack against Metasploitable's SSH service (repeated from Lab 1.3), then re-checked the auth log to compare a single manual failed login against the volume an automated brute-force tool produces.

5. Network / Flow Diagram
[Kali] --SSH wronguser/wrongpass--> [Metasploitable 192.168.56.101]
                                              |
                                              v
                          /var/log/auth.log records:
                          'Failed password for wronguser
                           from 192.168.56.X port NNNNN'

[Kali] --Hydra brute force (many attempts/sec)--> [Metasploitable]
                                                         |
                                                         v
                             auth.log: hundreds/thousands of
                             Failed password entries in seconds
                                         |
                                         v
                         (Would normally feed a SIEM, e.g. Wazuh,
                          which alerts on the volume/rate)

6. Results & Observations
Each failed login, whether from my single manual attempt or from Hydra, produced a distinct log entry containing a timestamp, the username that was attempted, and the source IP address the attempt came from.
The single manual failed login produced just a handful of entries, one per wrong-password attempt before I cancelled with Ctrl+C.
The Hydra brute-force run, in contrast, produced an enormous number of "Failed password" entries clustered within a few seconds, since the tool was attempting many username/password combinations per second.
The visual difference between a handful of scattered failed-login entries and hundreds of nearly back-to-back entries from the same source IP was immediately obvious just from scrolling the log, which is exactly the kind of pattern a SIEM rule is built to detect automatically.

7. What I Learned
This lab connected raw log data to the detection concepts the Security+ exam covers under operations and incident response. A single failed login is normal background noise; a sudden burst of hundreds of failed logins from one source in a short window is an Indicator of Compromise (IOC) consistent with a brute-force attack, and this is precisely the kind of pattern a SIEM (Security Information and Event Management) platform like Wazuh is designed to flag automatically rather than requiring an analyst to scroll through raw text.
Manually reproducing both the "quiet" baseline and the "loud" attack case in the same log file made it clear why log retention, log aggregation, and automated correlation rules matter operationally: a human reading auth.log by hand does not scale, but the underlying signal -- repeated failures from one source in a short time -- is the same signal a SIEM rule keys on.
